*This is the public posting of the assignment. See Canvas for the invite link to make your submission in your own repository in the class organization*

# Homework 9 - Email Classification
**Due:** Friday, April 21, 2023 by 11:59pm 

***NOTES:***
* You don't have to use the SQL classifier.  You can replace "classifier" with "basic_classifer" in naivebayes() to use the simple text-based classifier.
* The naivebayes classifier handles calculating probabilities on individual words.  Once you've initialized that, you just need to train on one email at a time and then test the classifier.
* For training, you want to read in each email separately as a string and then pass that string to train(). For example, to train on 5 emails, you would need to call train() 5 times.
* Your emails should be formatted as one per file.  They should also be plain text only.  The easiest way to do this is open the email normally in your email reader, select and copy all of the text, and paste into a plain text document.  This copy/paste process shouldn't include any of the underlying HTML.
* You can set up whatever classification labels you want, you don't have to use 'bad' and 'good'.  Just make sure that you only use 2 different labels.
* To test (classify), you want to read in each email to test separately and pass that to classify().  The return value from classify() is the result of the classification for that email.
* See the first cell under "Example 2 (pg. 127) - using thresholds" (in the Colab notebook) as an example of the process.  The sampletrain() function just calls train() multiple times on different documents.  In these examples, a single sentence is considered to be the entire document.


## Assignment

The goal of this assignment is to classify email into two groups based on topic -- either "on topic" or "not on topic".  You can choose the topic based on what types of emails you typically receive (or what you have access to).

Write a report that answers and *explains how you arrived at the answers* to the following questions.  Be sure to address any questions that are asked (indicated by "*Q: ...?*" in italics). Your GitHub repo should include all scripts, code, output files, images needed to complete the assignment.
 
**Important:** Because much of the code for this assignment is provided for you, your report will carry even more weight in your final grade for this assignment.  Your report must include a high-level description of how the code works and answers to all of the sub-questions asked.

Before starting, review the [HW report guidelines](https://github.com/odu-cs432-websci/public/blob/main/fall21/getting-started/reports.md).  Name your report for this assignment `HW9-report` with the proper file extension.  Do not edit this file (`README.md`).

**Tips for Completing this Assignment:**
* First, read the entire assignment before starting.
* Make sure you've watched the Module 13 lecture videos.
* Watch the HW9 intro video.
* *Don't start with a Google search.*  Your first references should be
    * [Module 13 lecture slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OpfBDl2YEE7AONVeKUyHA-J7a1mRjncD7cen8F6BG1A/edit?usp=sharing) and videos
    * [class Colab notebook](https://github.com/odu-cs432-websci/public/blob/main/spr23/432_F21_PCI_Ch06.ipynb)
    * [*Programming Collective Intelligence* book](https://go.oreilly.com/old-dominion-university/library/view/programming-collective-intelligence/9780596529321/) and [Chapter 6 code](https://github.com/arthur-e/Programming-Collective-Intelligence/tree/master/chapter6)  

### Q1. Create two datasets, Testing and Training.

You may choose a topic to classify your emails on (but choose only 1 topic). This can be spam, shopping emails, school emails, etc. 

The **Training** dataset should consist of
* 20 text documents for email messages you consider on your chosen topic
* 20 text documents for email messages you consider *not* on your chosen topic

The **Testing** dataset should consist of:
* 5 text documents for email messages you consider on your chosen topic
* 5 text documents for email messages you consider *not* on your chosen topic

Make sure that these are plain-text documents and that they do not include HTML tags.  The documents in the Testing set should be different than the documents in the Training set.

Upload your datasets to your GitHub repo. *Please do not include emails that contain sensitive information.*

*Q: What topic did you decide to classify on?*

### Q2. Naive Bayes classifier
Use the example code in the class Colab notebook to train and test the Naive Bayes classifier.  
* Use your *Training* dataset to *train* the Naive Bayes classifier.  
* Use your *Testing* dataset to *test* the Naive Bayes classifier.

Create a table to report the classification results for each email message in the *Testing* dataset.  The table should include what the classifier reported (on-topic or off-topic) and the actual classification.

*Q: For those emails that the classifier got wrong, what factors might have caused the classifier to be incorrect?  You will need to look at the text of the email to determine this.*

### Q3. Confusion Matrix
Draw a confusion matrix for your classification results (see Module 13, slides 40, 42, 43).  
* This should be a table in Markdown or LaTeX, not a screenshot of output or image generated by another program.  There's an example of a LaTeX confusion matrix in the [Overleaf report template](https://www.overleaf.com/read/tzvqcjvjtgdx).

*Q: Based on the results in the confusion matrix, how well did the classifier perform?*  

*Q: Would you prefer an email classifier to have more false positives or more false negatives?  Why?*

## Extra Credit

### Q4 *(1 point)* 

Report the precision and accuracy scores of your classification results (see Module 13, slide 43).  Include the formulas you used to compute these values.

### Q5 *(2 points)* 

Tune your classifier by updating weights to obtain better classification results. You may want to change the default weights (`weight`, `ap`) given to `weightedprob()` or the threshold used for the Bayesian classifier or change how the words are extracted from the document (for this you will need to re-train the model).  Report the changes you made, re-run your Testing dataset, and show that the performance improved (either by using the confusion matrix or by computing precision and accuracy).

If your classifier got all of the items correct in Q2, change the weights to make the classifier perform worse and discuss the results.

### Q6 *(4 points)* 

Implement the classifier with the Multinomial model instead of the multiple Bernoulli model and re-run Q2 and Q3.  Did the classification improve?  *Make sure to remove the unique word filter from the extractor.*

*For credit on this part, you must describe what you have done and discuss the differences between the Multinomial model and the multiple Bernoulli model.*

## Submission

Make sure that you have committed and pushed your local repo to GitHub.  Your repo should contain any code you developed to answer the questions.  Include "Ready to grade @faryaneh @nasreenarif" in your final commit message. 

Submit the URL of your *report* in Canavs:

* Click on HW9 under Assignments in Canavs
* Under "Assignment Submission", click the "Write Submission" button.
* Copy/paste the URL of your report into the edit box
  * should be something like https<nolink>://github.com/odu-cs432-websci/spring23-hw9-*username*/blob/master/HW9-report.{pdf,md}
* Make sure to "Submit" your assignment.
