*This is the public posting of the assignment. See Blackboard for the invite link to make your submission in your own repository in the class organization.*

# Homework 9 - Email Classification
**Due:** *Wednesday*, April 28, 2021 by 11:59pm 

## Assignment

Write a report that answers and explains your answers to the following questions. Support your answers by including all relevant discussion, assumptions, examples, etc. You must describe how you answered the questions. Your GitHub repo should include all scripts, code, output files, images needed to complete the assignment. If you use a Google Colab notebook, you must save a copy in your GitHub repo.

**Important:** Because much of the code for this assignment is provided for you, your report will carry even more weight in your final grade for this assignment.  Your report must include a high-level description of how the code works and answers to all of the sub-questions asked. 

*The goal of this assignment is to classify email into two groups based on topic -- either "on topic" or "not on topic".  You can choose the topic based on what types of emails you typically receive (or what you have access to).*

**Tips for Completing this Assignment:**
* First, read the entire assignment before starting.
* Make sure you've watched the Module 13 lecture videos.
* Watch the HW9 intro video.
* *Don't start with a Google search.*  Your first references should be
    * [Module 13 lecture slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1OpfBDl2YEE7AONVeKUyHA-J7a1mRjncD7cen8F6BG1A/edit?usp=sharing) and videos
    * [class Colab notebook](https://github.com/cs432-websci-master/public/blob/main/spr21/432_PCI_Ch06.ipynb)
    * [*Programming Collective Intelligence* book](https://go.oreilly.com/old-dominion-university/library/view/programming-collective-intelligence/9780596529321/) and [Chapter 6 code](https://github.com/arthur-e/Programming-Collective-Intelligence/tree/master/chapter6)  

**Report reminders:**
* Reports are not just a list of questions and answers, but *must* include descriptions, screenshots, copy-paste of code output, references, as necessary.  For each question you address, you must describe how you answered the question, including code snippets and description of the code you wrote to accomplish the task.  
* All graphs that you generate must be done in R or using a Python plotting library, and images must be inserted into your report.
* All reports must have a section labeled "References" for listing the outside resources you consulted.
  * You may use existing code, but you **must** document and reference where you adapted the code -- give credit where credit is due! *Use without attribution is plagiarism!*
* All reports must include your name, class (make sure to distinguish between CS 432 and CS 532), assignment number/title, and date.

### Q1. Create two datasets, Testing and Training.

You may choose a topic to classify your emails on (but choose only 1 topic). This can be spam, shopping emails, school emails, etc. 

The **Training** dataset should consist of
* 20 text documents for email messages you consider on your chosen topic
* 20 text documents for email messages you consider *not* on your chosen topic

The **Testing** dataset should consist of:
* 5 text documents for email messages you consider on your chosen topic
* 5 text documents for email messages you consider *not* on your chosen topic

Make sure that these are plain-text documents and that they do not include HTML tags.  The documents in the Testing set should be different than the documents in the Training set.

Upload your datasets to your GitHub repo. *Please do not include emails that contain sensitive information.*

*What topic did you decide to classify on?*

### Q2. Naive Bayes classifier
Use the example code in the class Colab notebook to train and test the Naive Bayes classifier.  
* Use your *Training* dataset to train the Naive Bayes classifier.  
* Use your *Testing* dataset to test the Naive Bayes classifier.

Create a table to report the classification results for each email message in the *Testing* dataset.  The table should include what the classifier reported (on-topic or off-topic) and the actual classification.

*For those emails that the classifier got wrong, look at the text and discuss what factors might have caused the classifier to be incorrect.*

### Q3. Confusion Matrix
Draw a confusion matrix for your classification results (see Module 13, slides 40, 42, 43).  
* This should be a table in Markdown or LaTeX, not a screenshot of output or image generated by another program.  There's an example of a LaTeX confusion matrix in the [Overleaf report template](https://www.overleaf.com/read/tzvqcjvjtgdx).

*Based on the results in the confusion matrix, how well did the classifier perform?*  

*Would you prefer an email classifier to have more false positives or more false negatives?  Why?*

## Extra Credit

### Q4. 
*(Extra credit, 1 point)* 

Report the precision and accuracy scores of your classification results (see Module 13, slide 43).  Include the formulas you used to compute these values.

### Q5. 
*(Extra credit, 2 points)* 

Tune your classifier by updating weights to obtain better classification results. You may want to change the default weights (`weight`, `ap`) given to `weightedprob()` or the threshold used for the Bayesian classifier or change how the words are extracted from the document (for this you will need to re-train the model).  Report the changes you made, re-run your Testing dataset, and show that the performance improved (either by using the confusion matrix or by computing precision and accuracy).

If your classifier got all of the items correct in Q2, change the weights to make the classifier perform worse and discuss the results.

### Q6. 
*(Extra credit, 4 points)* 

Implement the classifier with the Multinomial model instead of the multiple Bernoulli model and re-run Q2 and Q3.  Did the classification improve?  *Make sure to remove the unique word filter from the extractor.*

*For credit on this part, you must describe what you have done and discuss the differences between the Multinomial model and the multiple Bernoulli model.*

## Submission

Make sure that you have committed and pushed your local repo to GitHub.  Your repo should contain any code you developed to answer the questions.  Include "Ready to grade @weiglemc @brutushammerfist" in your final commit message. 

Submit the URL of your *report* in Blackboard:

* Click on HW9 under Assignments in Blackboard
* Under "Assignment Submission", click the "Write Submission" button.
* Copy/paste the URL of your report into the edit box
  * should be something like https<nolink>://github.com/cs432-websci-spr21/hw9-classify-*username*/blob/master/HW9-report.{pdf,md}
* Make sure to "Submit" your assignment.
